---
title: "Blackberry & Grain Salad"
slug: "21-07-20"
published_label: "Jul 20, 2021"
published_sort: "2021-07-20"
excerpt: "Adding blackberries to a savory dish may sound like a foreign concept, but don\u2019t knock it til you try it! The slight bitter flavor of the blackberries followed by the sweet caramel-y flavor of the cooked onions stimul..."
author: "Christina Hill"
feature: false
cover_image: ""
cover_alt: "Blackberry & Grain Salad"
tags: ["Recipes"]
---

## Overview

Adding blackberries to a savory dish may sound like a foreign concept, but don’t knock it til you try it! The slight bitter flavor of the blackberries followed by the sweet caramel-y flavor of the cooked onions stimulates your taste buds. And as an added bonus, it’s so easy to make!

### 2 servings

## Ingredients

- ½ cup Spelt Berries*, dry
- 1 cup Blackberries*
- ½ cup Sweet Onion*, diced
- 2 cloves Garlic*, roughly chopped
- ¼ cup Olive Oil, seperated
- 2 tablespoons Balsamic Vinegar
- Salt & Pepper, to taste
- 2 tablespoons Parsley*, roughly chopped
- 8 ounces Cheese Curds* (optional)

*available from local producers at [Countryside Farmers’ Market at Howe Meadow](https://countrysidefoodandfarms.org/howe-meadow/)

## Method

1. Cook Spelt Berries: In a saucepan, combine spelt berries with 1 1/2 cups of water and a pinch of salt. Bring to a boil and allow to simmer for about 40 minutes. If there is still water in the pan after the time is up, test to see if the spelt berries are tender. If they aren’t, continue to simmer. If they are, strain the remaining water.
2. In a sauté pan, heat 2 tbsp. of olive oil over medium heat. Add onions and garlic. Cook until lightly browned; about 5 minutes.
3. In a mixing bowl, combine cooked spelt berries, sautéed onions & garlic, remaining olive oil, vinegar, salt & pepper, parsley, and cheese curds(optional). Stir until well combined and ENJOY!
