---
title: "Asparagus Mushroom Stir-Fry"
slug: "22-03-12"
published_label: "Mar 12, 2022"
published_sort: "2022-03-12"
excerpt: "Asparagus is a sure sign that spring has sprung! Put a little Asian twist on your fresh spring asparagus with this delicious stir-fry recipe featuring not only asparagus, but also green onions and mushrooms."
author: "Christina Hill"
feature: false
cover_image: ""
cover_alt: "Asparagus Mushroom Stir-Fry"
tags: ["Recipes"]
---

## Overview

Asparagus is a sure sign that spring has sprung! Put a little Asian twist on your fresh spring asparagus with this delicious stir-fry recipe featuring not only asparagus, but also green onions and mushrooms.

Recipe from [The Garden Grazer](https://www.thegardengrazer.com/asparagus-and-mushroom-stir-fry/)

### 4 servings

## Ingredients

- 1 lb. Fresh Asparagus*
- 1 lb. Mushrooms* of choice
- 2 -3 Green Onions* (optional)
- 1 Tbsp. Toasted Sesame Oil
- 2 tsp. Sesame Seeds (for garnish)

For the Garlic Sauce:

- 1/2 cup V egetable Broth (or Bone Broth)
- 2 Tbsp. T amari (or Soy Sauce)
- 2–3 Cloves of G arlic
- 1 Tbsp. C ornstarch (or other thickener of choice)
- 1/2 tsp. F reshly Grated Ginger (optional)

## Method

1. Make the sauce: Mince garlic, and add all sauce ingredients to a small bowl. Stir to combine and set aside.
2. Halve or quarter the mushrooms (wiped clean). Cut asparagus into 1-inch pieces, woody ends removed. Slice green onions, if using.
3. In a large skillet (or wok) over medium-high heat, add sesame oil.
4. When hot, carefully add the mushrooms and cook for 3-4 minutes.
5. Add the asparagus and green onions. Cook another 3-4 minutes, stirring often.
6. Re-stir the sauce, then add to skillet. Stir well and cook for 2-3 minutes (or until vegetables are desired tenderness).
7. Garnish with sesame seeds and spoon any remaining sauce over the vegetables before serving if desired.

*available from local producers at [Countryside Farmers’ Market](https://countrysidefoodandfarms.org/about-the-markets/)
