# Bison Sausage and Apple Stuffed Acorn Squash

*by Madison Letizia | Aug 16, 2022 | Recipes*

Somewhere between summer and fall you will find the season’s first acorn squash. With their sweet, yellow-orange flesh and a slightly nutty flavor, acorn squash are rich in antioxidants and a can’t-miss seasonal treat.

Recipe from Akron Ohio Moms
4-6 servings

## Recipe details

- Source: Akron Ohio Moms
- Yield: 4-6 servings

## Ingredients

- 3 medium Acorn Squash*
- 1 cup Organic Oat Groats*
- 1 lb. Bison Sausage Links, casing removed*
- 1 tsp Olive Oil
- 1 cup Onion, chopped*
- 1 Green Pepper, chopped*
- 2 cloves Garlic, minced*
- 1 Green Apple, chopped*
- 1 stalk Celery Stem and Leaves, chopped*
- 6 Organic Brown Eggs*
- ¼ tsp Kosher Salt
- ¼ tsp Black Pepper

## Method

1. Preheat oven to 375°F.
2. Bring 3 cups of water and a dash of salt to a boil in a medium saucepan. Add 1 cup organic oat groats, cover, and reduce temperature to a gentle simmer for 40 minutes, stirring occasionally, until soft and water is absorbed. Set aside.
3. While oat groats are simmering, cut the acorn squash widthwise and scoop out the seeds with a metal spoon.
4. Place acorn squash cut-side down onto your baking sheet. Bake for 20-25 minutes or until your acorn squash is soft when you press on the skin. Remove from the oven and let cool.
5. While squash and oat groats are cooking, add olive oil to a large skillet over medium heat.
6. Add onion, green peppers, garlic, and celery stems and leaves, sauté until onion is translucent, about 3 minutes.
7. Add Bison sausage and cook, breaking it up until no pink remains. Remove from heat.
8. Stir in chopped apples and cooked oat groats.
9. Spoon the bison mixture into the cooked acorn squash halves and make a whole in the center for the egg. Crack an egg into each side of the acorn squash and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
10. Bake for another 10-15 minutes or until the eggs are cooked to your preference.
